---
layout: talk
title:  Quantum algorithms for dynamics and dynamical observables
venue:  CECAM/QSE @ EPFL
event:  Quantum Algorithms for Chemistry and Material Science Simulation Workshop
date:  Dec 13, 2023
author: Alexander (Lex) Kemper
pdf: /pdfs/talks/2023_12_CECAM.pdf
note:
---

## Abstract
Response functions are a fundamental aspect of physics; they represent the link between experimental
observations and the underlying quantum many-body state. In particular, dynamical response functions
are part of the toolbox that physicists use to unravel the nature of correlated matter. In this talk, I will
discuss some aspects of obtaining response functions on quantum computers.
First, I will introduce a new method for measuring response functions by using a linear response
framework and making the experiment an inextricable part of the quantum simulation. This method can
be frequency- and momentum-selective, avoids limitations on operators that can be directly measured,
and is ancilla-free. As prototypical examples of response functions, we demonstrate that both bosonic
and fermionic Green’s functions can be obtained, and apply these ideas to the study of a charge-
density-wave material. The linear response method provides a robust framework for using quantum
computers to study systems in physics and chemistry. It also provides new paradigms for computing
response functions on classical computers.
Second, I will highlight some of our recent work using Lie algebraic methods to analyze and simulate
dynamics on quantum computers. Lie algebras are a natural way to investigate certain properties of
quantum circuits, and conversely use them to build desired quantum circuits. I will overview some of
our work in this area, including building exact unitaries via Cartan decomposition, performing circuit
compression, and analyzing barren plateaus.
