---
layout  : paper
title   : Classification of dynamical Lie algebras generated by spin interactions on undirected graphs
authors : K&#0246;kc&#0252; E, Wiersema R, Kemper AF, Bakalov B
year    : 2026
ref     : "E. K&#0246;kc&#0252; et al., J. Math. Phys (2026)"
journal : "J. Math. Phys. 67, 052205 (2026)"
arxiv   : "2409.19797"
image   : /images/papers/kokcu_graph2D_dla.png"
ncsu    : True
doi     : 10.1063/5.0283277
funding : "1818914: STAQ, 2325080: STAQII"
---

# Abstract
Dynamical Lie algebras (DLAs) are a versatile tool for various topics that span from the expressibility-trainability of variational quantum algorithms (VQAs), to simulation of many body Hamiltonians. Quantum gates and most of the Hamiltonians of interest consist of local interactions; therefore, the analysis of all possible DLAs generated by 1- and 2-local operators is crucial for quantum simulation and VQAs on current hardware. Previously in [R. Wiersema et al., npj Quantum Inf. 10, 110 (2024)], we analyzed the DLAs on linear, circular and all-to-all topologies, and obtained results about their dimensions and algebraic structure. In this work, we extend our analysis into any possible hardware topology and provide a classification of all DLAs generated by Pauli strings on any undirected interaction graph. Our results indicate that the DLAs depend solely on whether the connectivity or interaction graph is bipartite or not. In addition, we find that the non-trivial polynomially scaling DLAs appear only on 1D line or circle topologies, and all other DLAs have dimensions scaling exponentially with the system size. Together with the current VQA literature, our results imply that either the majority of VQAs are non-trainable, or we are yet to understand the role of DLAs on the trainability of VQAs.
